How do we turn imagined realities into something known. Obviously the intersubjectivity of the matter cannot change, but the level of conscious awareness thereof must cross some new threshold. It's not as if today's imagined realities are completely nebulous or unknown in the first place. At what point is the threshold crossed? Is there a way to meaningfully define a threshold? Must it feel like and/or be an arbitrary thing? iirc, Harari suggests that "true believers" are indeed necessary to sustain imagined realities; is that really true? It seems at least possible that we can all acknowledge to abide by rules without deifying or even claiming that the rules are of some special nature, some higher level of truth - or even of a normal physical level of truth. We ought to, at least in theory, be capable of agreeing that the rules by which we abide are of a lower level of truth, and that, we abide by them only because they are the best rules known for acheiving our various human goals. I suppose that would require us to have human goals, which would of course themselves fall largely into that lower class of truth, except for maybe a subset thereof. There is likely a subset of goals that we can tie to individual human needs - something along the lines of Maslow's pyramid. There might even be a similar set of identifiable group needs. As Banks proposes in The Culture Series, even the species needs a motive to thrive. Plus when the core motive is to spread itself, the motive of the species then feels like it - and to at least a minor extent, it actually - has a physical basis: reproduction. Perhaps more noble, you could claim that understanding of ourselves and of the universe drives us outward, and that this understanding is facilitated by the underlying spreading and necessary reproduction, if only to expand our observational capacities. (It strikes me that understanding isn't clearly a human goal unto itself. Nor is it necessarily a goal of the species. Understanding, seems to follow a deeper thread, along the lines of organization... stuff into stuff into stuff into atoms into compounds into molecules, cells, organisms, tribes, empires, etc. The liberal humanist would claim that the human level is special, just as the tribesman might claim that the tribe is special, or the social humanist that the society is special.) And with these as our goals, the subset may well become the set, and if it can, if it does, we may well find a new form of being human. The society becoming the super-organism, eliminating the importance of tribe and empire in the sequence. (Here again, I think I'm touching on a different topic... the nature of consciousness or intelligence or recognition. Many people like to claim that there is a clear maximum in the individual human, that consciousness is a special pinacle of being, unsurpassable even by any larger more complicated entity. It seems to me though that in the same way a monkey fails to recognize that it is made of cells that humanity may be failing to realize that it's made up of organisms. The sense is a bit different, because we do of course recognize that we are made up of cells, but no cell ever recognized that it was made up of molecules nor any molecule of protons and electrons. Still, it's possible to imagine an organizational structure so large and complex that any individual human could only process it as a very high level abstraction of it's true internal processes, and that it in turn would have no more need to process the inner workings of the human individual comprising it than we have need to understand the inner workings of our cells. That is to say, it would still be very important for various things, but those things would be but a tiny portion of things which are important to understand.) The conflict then becomes one explored extensively by Banks: how and where does the whole derive value from the parts, small and weak and fragile as they may be. Or, does the evolution's manifestation strike an implicit balance like in many of Asimov's works or is the problem nullified by the nature of the goals or by the nature of the manifestation as in, not humans as god, but A Human as god.

Universal motivators are hard to come by. A real alien threat is one, and we see specters of others, but so far shadows are as close as we've come. Global climate change for all its seriousness and imminence still fails to truly unite - and in fact devides - the species (or at least the United States). 
